quick question for you can you name the
basic human senses yeah that's right
sight hearing smell taste and touch you
can close your eyes to not see anything
you can hold your nose to stop detecting
sense but it's impossible to turn off
your sense of touch and that's what
makes it so ever-present and important
in our lives your sense of touch is the
first sense that develops before you're
even born you get it while inside the
womb and it stays with you till your
last breath helping you navigate in the
environment and affecting your everyday
life in so many ways you probably think
you make decisions based on your
freewill well think again the way a
person thinks and makes decisions can be
influenced by touching light or heavy
objects this is what researchers from
Harvard University and Yale University
discovered during their experiment
people were asked to look through
resumes that were stuck to different
clip woods and describe the impressions
they got about the candidates after
evaluating them they rated candidates
with resumes on heavy clipboards as more
serious than those whose resume was on a
like clipboard ah now I know why I
didn't get that job Ron clipboard what's
more your behavior can be influenced by
the surface you're sitting on in another
test people who sat on hard seats were
less open and agreeable during
negotiations than those who sat on soft
chairs there was also an experiment that
involved playing with puzzle pieces that
were either smooth or had the texture of
sandpaper those who touch the ragged
puzzle pieces rated social interactions
is more difficult and harsh than those
who handled smooth pieces all those
tests reveal that physical touch has a
great impact on our abstract thinking
different textures evoke feelings that
make his act and perceive the people
around us in a particular way
another interesting experiment confirms
this idea and its results were published
in 2008 in science journal participants
held either a cold iced drink or a hot
drink while meeting someone those with a
hot drink reported that the people they
met came across as warmer and more
friendly but our sense of touch not only
helps us come to conclusions about our
surroundings it also protects us from
danger by letting us feel pain with free
nerve endings acting as receptors on our
skin paying sends information to the
brain if there is a real or potential
injury to the body came from the skin is
transmitted through two types of nerve
fibers a delta fibers deliver sharp
pricking types of pain like after
stepping on a Lego brick out I know C
fibers really dull aches and burning
sensations impulses are sent to the
spinal cord where they interact with the
special neurons that transmit signals to
different areas of the brain each neuron
responds to a number of different pain
stimuli pain is carried by many types of
neurotransmitters which are chemicals
that send info from one cell to another
thanks to this fact it's possible to
develop different types of pain
relieving medications the way we
experience pain can be affected by many
factors pain tolerance varies from
person to person and also depends on the
circumstances if you're engaged in an
activity that demands intense
concentration it can diminish or even
eliminate the perception of pain for the
duration of the activity that's how
athletes achieve amazing sports results
even though their bodies get injured
during their performance your body has
one set of skin sensors that lets you
know exactly where the pain is and how
strong it is another system tells you
about the negative emotional aspect of
the pain however some people experience
a condition called pain assim boliya
they are still aware of pain and they
know where it comes from and what part
of their body is affected by it but they
just don't really care there is a common
test to measure your pain threshold that
involves a bucket of ice you stick your
hand in it and then report the level of
pain you feel
most people get their hands out after a
pretty short period but people with pain
assim boliya are so indifferent to the
pain they're exposed to that they don't
feel any urge to avoid it and can keep
your hands in the bucket for ages they
lack the system that conveys the
negative emotional aspect of the pain
and therefore don't consider pain
unpleasant that sounds like some
superhuman ability are they invincible
no in fact these people aren't greater
danger than those with normal pain
tolerance because even without feeling
pain their bodies still get injuries
their skin experience severe frostbite
after the ice bucket test sometimes we
can acquire temporary numbness that
worsens our sense of touch this happens
when you're too absorbed in trying to
get visual information ask any pocket
thief and they will tell you that the
best time to steal a wallet is when the
target is busy perhaps reading a
newspaper on a crowded train or looking
closely for a departure time for a plane
at an airport the ID are supported by
research from Royal Holloway University
of London it found evidence that looking
too hard at something makes you feel
less sensitive to touch so don't let
your eyes wander folks the sense of
touch also gets worse as you get older
at age 16 to 18 our touch receptors
transmit information to our brain over a
short period of time after that the
process becomes slower and slower on the
bright side that can be a good thing
because you feel surface paying less
acutely but unfortunately it can affect
our walking abilities in later life this
is one reason why older people may fall
more often they get less information
from the sensations on the bottom of
their feet
remember those C fibers I mentioned
before they are not only responsible for
the distinction of a dull ache those
special sensors play an important role
in recognizing the social bonding touch
when you get a hug from a friend or the
soothing touch of your mother when you
were a kid
actually the earlier baby gets their
first touch experience with their mother
or primary caregiver the better babies
who were deprived of this because of
adverse circumstances had weakened
immune systems and cognitive problems
while developing also they experienced
different psychological problems during
their childhood and later on in life
that's why when a baby is born much
earlier than the estimated due date and
put in an isolator doctors allow the
parents to take them out for a few hours
so they can press the baby against their
skin when Isolators were first invented
it was believed that it was better to
leave babies alone in there to avoid the
risk of infections but it turned out
that infections are not as harmful as a
lack of skin-to-skin contact with the
parents even when you grow up it's still
important to have interaction with
others through physical sensation this
can even have a healing effect research
conducted at the University of North
Carolina proved that women who got more
hugs from their partners had lower blood
pressure and heart rates okay moreover
the more tactile sensations we receive
from others the more successful we are
researchers studied NBA players and came
to the conclusion that teams in which
members engage more often in high-fives
hi tens chess punches and team Huddle's
perform better than those who had less
practice in these kinds of interactions
okay I guess that makes it okay to give
your coworkers surprise hugs just make
sure they don't mind unfortunately with
the rapid development of technology
people have fewer chances for physical
contact with others they communicate
with their friends via messaging apps
more often than face-to-face and those
who have freelance jobs usually don't
keep in touch with their co-workers
deprivation of human touch can lead to
many problems including depression and
anxiety well if you feel way too lonely
and in need of a hug you can always turn
to a professional cuddler yeah that's a
real job and people get paid for it
professional cuddlers see their work as
a form of therapy that helps lonely
people feel accepted appreciated and
more comfortable in this cold modern
world
when was the last time you hug someone
sound off in the comments below and be
sure to give this video a like share it
with your friends and click subscribe to
always stay on the bright side of life